Cameron Station Civic Association
	200 Cameron Station Blvd.
					Alexandria, VA 22304

September_, 2019

 Via Email

Members of the Planning Commission
City Hall
301 King Street
Alexandria, Virginia 22314

Re: Virginia Paving SUP Condition #75 (Sunset Provision)

Dear Members of the Planning Commission:

Virginia Paving’s Special Use Permit (“SUP”) condition #75 (referred to as the “Sunset Provision”) states, in pertinent part, that “City Council shall review this SUP, conduct a public hearing, and determine if the continued operation of this use is inconsistent with the Eisenhower West Small Area Plan (SAP) and implementing zoning amendments, anticipated for adoption in 2009, and with the ensuing and foreseeable development and redevelopment in the area. Such public hearing shall be held, and determination made, on or about three years after adoption of the SAP….In the event Council determines that the continued operation of the use is inconsistent with such SAP, implementing zoning and development or redevelopment, the use, and all related tenant operations on or within the site after expiration of the current lease (which is 2016), shall terminate at such time as the Council shall determine, which shall not be sooner than seven years after the adoption of the SAP or longer than the applicable amortization period under Zoning Ordinance Section 12-214 as demonstrated by the Applicant….” (Emphasis added)

The Board of the Cameron Station Civic Association (“CSCA Board”) is troubled by the fact that the Planning Commission is reviewing the Sunset Provision since SUP provision #75 states that only City Council has the authority to make the determinations required. Nevertheless, if the Planning Commission chooses to keep this item on the docket for the October 3, 2019 public hearing, the CSCA Board respectfully requests that the Planning Commission find that Virginia Paving’s heavy industrial use at its asphalt plant located at 5601 & 5603 Courtney Avenue and 720, 730 & 750 South Van Dorn Street in Alexandria (“Virginia Paving”) is inconsistent with the Eisenhower West SAP (“EWSAP”) and with the ensuing and foreseeable development and redevelopment in the West End of Alexandria.

A.	The Conditions for Invoking Virginia Paving’s Sunset Provision Have Been Met

SUP provision #75 requires a straightforward two-pronged analysis: (1) is the current heavy industrial use inconsistent with the SAP?; and, (2) is the current heavy industrial use inconsistent with the ensuing and foreseeable development and redevelopment in the area? The answer to both questions is a simple, “Yes”.  Considerations beyond these two are not relevant for purposes of this straightforward analysis.

Both the Landmark/Van Dorn Corridor Plan and the EWSAP envision significant redevelopment to occur within the combined total of 850 acres encompassed by them and this acreage includes the Virginia Paving facility. Both plans envision mixed use development to occur with increased density closer to the Van Dorn Metro station. Neither plan envisions more heavy industrial uses within their respective planning areas.

The EWSAP recognizes that the current heavy industrial use by Virginia Paving is inconsistent with the plan since it states that “…a site so close to a Metrorail station should be redeveloped in the future into a more compatible use.” The presentations by City Staff at the May 22, 2019 Eisenhower West – Landmark Van Dorn Implementation Advisory Group meeting as well as at the September 11, 2019 Eisenhower West – Landmark Van Dorn Implementation Advisory Group meeting (“City Staff May 22, 2019 Presentation” and “City Staff September 11, 2019 Presentation”, respectively), both noted that the “EWSAP recommends the redevelopment of this site and other heavy industrial uses to a more compatible land-use.” The City Staff September 11, 2019 Presentation further stated that nation  by City Staff at the September 11, 2019 Eisenhower West – Landmark Van Dorn Implementation Advisory Group meeting), noted that the “Staff concludes that asphalt plant is NOT CONSISTENR with – Eisenhower West SAP recommendations [or] – Ensuing and foreseeable area development.” (Emphasis in original)

Virginia Paving is one of only three remaining heavy industrial uses in the EWSAP study area. It is directly across the street from Vulcan Materials site (a former heavy industrial use) which is slated for redevelopment. In fact, Ken Wire, counsel for the current owner of the site, gave a presentation on the current conceptual plans for redevelopment at the Vulcan Materials site at the September 11, 2019 Eisenhower West – Landmark Van Dorn Implementation Advisory Group meeting. The location of the Vulcan Materials and the Virginia Paving sites so close to the Van Dorn Metro and to each other would seem to make them good candidates for high-density mixed-use development as envisioned under the EWSAP.

Virginia Paving is also within a very short distance of the Brandywine project, Cameron Station, the Cameron Park project, the Edsall Shell project, the huge Greenhill redevelopment projects (Greenhill North and Greenhill South), Modera Tempo, and the redevelopment of the Victory Center.  Moreover, Virginia Paving is also close to the recently approved Public Storage project on South Pickett street that envisions redevelopment of the back end of the acquired land that borders Backlick Run. Accordingly, a heavy industrial use such as Virginia Paving’s is obviously inconsistent with “foreseeable development and redevelopment in the West End of Alexandria.” As noted above, City staff is in agreement with this conclusion.

B.	Relevant Background on Virginia Paving

There are many other compelling reasons for City Council to invoke the Sunset Provision of Virginia Paving’s SUP provision #75. However, these are not reasons contemplated under SUP #75 and are set forth below solely as useful background information.
Before getting into other relevant background on Virginia Paving, we wish to dismiss two red herrings that Virginia Paving floated at the most recent meeting of the Eisenhower West – Landmark Van Dorn Implementation Advisory Group on September 11, 2019. At that meeting, counsel for Virginia Paving made a thinly vailed threat of a legal challenge should the City invoke the Sunset Provision stating that that provision is “null and void” because the hearing on it did not occur three years after adoption of the EWSAP . We believe that this claim is without merit. Current counsel for Virginia Paving was their counsel when Virginia Paving signed off on their SUP which gave them more than double their annual production. If time was of the essence and the three year period in this SUP provision was meant to be a definitive time limitation, counsel for Virginia Paving should have requested that the language state that “[s]uch public hearing shall be held, and determination made, no later than [or within three years] after adoption of the SAP.” That was not done and the SUP provision contains the flexible terminology “on or about three years.” Alternatively, counsel for Virginia Paving could have tried to press the issue a year ago rather than roughly one month before this SUP provision is being scheduled for consideration before City Council. The City Staff September 11, 2019 Presentation makes it clear that this argument by Virginia Paving is without merit and states that ”Virginia Paving is contesting City Council’s authority to review the SUP pursuant to Condition #75 based on timing[.] Staff believes the ‘on or about’ is being met[.] Condition language does not require precision on the date[.] Condition language does not provide for the SUP review to be ‘null and void’ due to timing….”

Another red herring floated by counsel for Virginia Paving at the September 11 meeting of the Eisenhower West – Landmark Van Dorn Implementation Advisory Group was that Virginia Paving was being treated unfairly by City Staff as compared to other heavy industrial uses.  That is not the case. The other heavy industrial uses within the boundaries of the EWSAP did not agree to a SUP containing a Sunset Provision. The City probably does not have a sound legal basis to force these other heavy industrial uses within the EWSAP to move out of the area, but Virginia Paving agreed to be bound by its SUP which contained the Sunset Provision. Virginia Paving asked City Council for permission to double its annual production and not the other way around. My recollection is that Virginia Paving also originally wanted to double production without spending any money on environmental upgrades even though, at that time, it was in violation of numerous environmental regulations. The City granted Virginia Paving permission to double its production and, in return, Virginia Paving agreed to an SUP requiring it to make environmental upgrades and to have a Sunset Provision. Calling this unfair, after literally reaping profits of increased production for almost thirteen years, is simply laughable.

1.	Virginia Paving’s Product is no Longer in High Demand

Unlike the other two remaining heavy industrial uses (Covanta Energy to Waste and the Norfolk Southern Railroad Ethanol Transloading Facility), the need for Virginia Paving’s product is diminishing as evidenced by its low production output in 2017 and 2018 (an average of 240,954 tons of its allowable annual output of 980,000 tons). In addition and more importantly, asphalt needs can be accommodated by Virginia Paving’s nearby facilities (in Chantilly, Lorton or in Sterling, VA) or by its competitors (e.g. Fort Myer Construction Corporation, Laurel Asphalt Company, Forestville Asphalt Company and/or Senate Asphalt).

2.	Virginia Paving’s Location Will Impede the Ability to Build a Multimodal Bridge

Further and as noted in both the City Staff May 22, 2019 Presentation and the City Staff September 11, 2019 Presentation, the City’s “[p]referred option for the multimodal bridge would bisect the site [i.e. Virginia Paving’s property].” Norfolk Southern has also indicated the same preference for locating this multimodal bridge with some slight modifications. Locating the multimodal bridge at the site preferred by the City as well as by Norfolk Southern becomes impossible if Virginia Paving remains at its current location.

3.	Redevelopment of Virginia Paving’s Property Would be a Net Monetary Gain for Alexandria

At the September 11 meeting of the Eisenhower West – Landmark Van Dorn Implementation Advisory Group, Virginia Paving made much of the fact that the City saved money by buying its asphalt from the plant and the fact that it collected taxes from the plant. Virginia Paving’s presentation at the September 11 Advisory Group meeting indicated that the combined total of such taxes and savings on asphalt are $646,627.  The City Staff September 11, 2019 Presentation noted that the benefits to the City from redevelopment of the property would amount to approximately $1,000,000 per year. Accordingly, even assuming that Virginia Paving’s numbers are not inflated, the City would gain over $350,000 per year if the plant moved and the property was redeveloped.

4.	Virginia Paving’s Operations Emit Water and Air Pollutants
The October Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Climate Report noted that we have a climate emergency and that we must take immediate action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in half by 2030. On July 9, 2019, City Council passed the Environmental Action Plan 2040 which commits the City to building net-zero energy public buildings, to cut in half all City-wide emissions by 2030, and reducing community greenhouse gas emissions by 80 to 100% by 2050. Virginia Paving’s operations result in the emission of harmful substances such as but not limited to volatile organic compounds, nitrogen oxides, sulfur dioxides and small particulates (i.e. PM2.5 and PM10). Eliminating pollution from heavy industrial uses like Virginia Paving would send a positive message that both the Planning Commission and City Council continue to be serious about protecting our environment.
5.	Virginia Paving’s Past and Recent Environmental and Other Violations

The City should not forget that it took enormous efforts during 2005 and 2006 by the Cameron Station Civic Association and numerous other civic associations (located throughout the City) to get Virginia Paving to become somewhat compliant and make necessary environmental upgrades to stop it from continuing to violate numerous environmental standards. All these violations were occurring while the Samuel W. Tucker Elementary School was (and still is) less than a football field from the plant. During the time Virginia Paving was seeking to modify its SUP in order to more than double its annual production, it was in violation of a total of twenty-four federal, state and local environmental regulations:

•	Two violations of the federal Clean Water Act;
•	One violation of Virginia state codes relating to the illegal discharge of waste into state waters;
•	Fifteen violations of the state fire code;
•	Three violations of its then SUP;
•	One violation of City codes for illegal dumping of waste; and
•	Two “miscellaneous violations” relating to possible encroachment on City owned land and damage to City right of way at various intersections caused by asphalt spillover and accumulation.

In 2008, the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality issued a Notice of Violation to Virginia Paving for: (1) “submitting incorrect stack test data to DEQ”; (2) “exceeding short term emission limits” for “Nitrogen Oxides”, Carbon Monoxide” and “Volatile Organic Compounds”, and; (3) installing a low NOx Burner without first obtaining a permit. In 2011, Virginia Paving was (1) in violation of its Virginia state industrial stormwater permit and (2) received a warning letter from the state regarding two inconsistencies with their air quality permit (one about monitoring/record keeping and another about the installation of a screen near the RAP crusher equipment that was not pre-approved).  The City Staff May 22, 2019 Presentation noted that there continue to be citizen complaints related to both noxious smells and noise. At the same meeting, City Staff stated that there are “encroachment issues” by Virginia Paving on a “public right of way.” The City Staff September 11, 2019 Presentation notes that  that the “[t]otal encroachment into Courtney Ave is 36,181” square feet.

C.	Conclusion

In short, the continued heavy industrial uses at Virginia Paving’s asphalt plant located at 5601 Courtney Avenue are inconsistent with the EWSAP and with the ensuing and foreseeable development and redevelopment in the West End of Alexandria.

If there are any questions concerning these comments, please contact the undersigned at aimpastato54@gmail.com, or by phone at (703) 567-5075.

Sincerely,

/s/

Arthur A. Impastato
President
Cameron Station Civic Association

cc: Mark Jinks
      Karl Moritz
     Nathan Randall
